[Music]
Hello and welcome. I have a doctor and
oncologist as my guest today. You
probably know him better as the Pulitza
prizewinning biographer of cancer Dr.
Siddhhatam Mukheraji. His book the
emperor of all malades is a lucid and
gripping account of this complex disease
and our ongoing battle with it. He is in
India these days speaking at various
forums including here at the litfest the
Tata literature life festival in Mumbai.
Sedat Mukhaji good to have you on the
show. My pleasure. The Pulitza prize has
really propelled this book into the
limelight got it a lot of attention. has
it done uh what you wanted to do for the
subject of the book which is the
discussion on cancer and and the way we
are dealing with the disease. Well, I
hope so. Uh I think it's important for
me part of the reason for writing the
book was to demystify something that was
very mysterious to many people. Uh
cancer is not one disease but many
diseases and there was a huge amount of
uh mythology around cancer. people
feared uh the word and they didn't want
to read about it. Um so in a way that in
a way I think writing the book allowed
me to explore my own history of the
history of this of this disease but also
allowed me to understand what people
were uh fearing. In the book at one
point you you have described you know
you say and I'm quoting from the book
this image of cancer as a desperate
malvolent contemporary doppelganger is
so haunting because it is at least
partly true. A cancer cell is an
astonishing perversion of the normal
cell. Cancer is a phenomenally
successful invader and colonizer in part
because it exploits the very features
that makes us successful as a species or
as an organism. And I think would I be
right in saying this is at the heart of
Yes. in fact you know the entire
perspective you want to bring on this
exactly right. I mean if you really
distill down uh and ask the question
well what is cancer? The quick answer is
well there's not one cancer. Breast
cancer is very different from brain
cancer. But that said there are very
deep fundamental principles that cross
all forms of cancer. Now what are those
principles? Well ultimately cancer
results from cells that don't know how
to stop growing. uh it's uh pathological
growth of cells and the crux is that
well you could ask well why what makes
cells grow pathologically? Well it turns
out that the very genes uh that allow
cells to grow normally if you distort
those genes you get pathological growth.
So unlike really any other disease
cancer is fundamentally linked to
normaly. Uh in other words, the very
genes that allow our embryos to grow,
our hands to grow, if you distort those
genes, uh you get cancer. So cancer is
growth distorted. Um and you can't do
away with growth and therefore it's part
of our genetic inheritance. There are
different kinds of cancers and yet your
book the starting point at least and uh
you know the sort of underpinning uh is
leukemia which is blood cancer and it's
rarer isn't it than the other forms of
cancer. Why then did you pick that? Even
though leukemia represents a very rare
form of cancer, uh it's still uh it
still lives at the cutting edge of
cancer research. It's a very peculiar
series of historical uh instances that
allow this to happen. One reason is that
unlike most forms of solid cancer, by
solid cancer, I mean things that grow in
lumps like breast cancer or lung cancer,
leukemia is a liquid cancer. Uh it's a
cancer of white blood cells. So by its
very nature it's spread throughout the
body and so you can't treat you can't go
to a surgeon and say take my leukemia
away by its very nature if you treat
leukemia as if it's a disease that's
already spread throughout the body and
therefore you you have to use things
like chemical therapies chemotherapy um
and so leukemia therefore launches a
very different mechanism to look at
cancer changes the imagination of cancer
it's a very interesting story that a
rare variant can really drive the
research of the more common variants and
Actually interesting it's present in
other fields of science too. You studied
to be a doctor and why did you then
decide to study oncology. What was the
personal trigger for you to choose this
branch? Well to for me I mean I I came
to oncology sort of in reverse. Uh I I
often say that I backed into oncology
like backing a car into cancer and the
reason was I trained as a cell
biologist. Um I was in England uh after
finishing some undergraduate my
undergraduate work um in the United
States. I went to England and I was
studying how the immune system works.
Um, and in doing so, I began to study a
virus that's linked to cancer. Um, it's
a very interesting virus. It's called
Epstein bar virus. And one very peculiar
thing about Epstein bar virus is that
the same virus in China will cause a
very different kind of cancer uh cancer
of the nose and uh the the sort of the
fins. If you take that same virus and
you put it now in an area where there's
a lot of malaria, it'll cause a
lymphoma. Uh so again it illustrates the
complex nature of the interaction
between some genetic components some
virus and the environment that are
changing that uh so I I was studying
this virus and I was studying cancer
cells that were uh initiated by this
virus and I started beginning to wonder
as a graduate student look under the
microscope and I really think to myself
well what's outside the microscope what
what's the organ you what's the
organismal level of the question so I
went sort of upwards from from a cell to
ask questions about on the human scale.
Most people go start in the human scale
and go down into the cell. But it was I
had a reverse journey into oncology
intoology. Exactly. Into the study of
cancer clinically. You've dedicated your
book to Robert Sandler who is this young
boy who lived for just 3 years because
he was suffering from leukemia in the
40s. Your patients have been one of the
triggers for you coming out with this
book, isn't it? Uh I find something very
interesting that you've said in one of
your interviews about how hope is
malleable and how as a doctor who deals
or treats cancer. It's not about cure so
much as about coping with death. Would I
be right? Well, I mean I mean you're
right in one sense. I mean I I don't
think that coping with death is the only
outcome. I mean pe we have we're living
in times where people can live uh 10 12
15 years with breast cancer for
instance. Um, now that doesn't mean that
they've been cured. They're living with
cancer as a chronic disease. Now, just
that idea uh to say that the conversion
of some cancers into a into chronic
diseases would have been considered
hubristic and crazy in the 1950s, but
that's happened with some cancer. People
are living with prostate cancer. Uh, you
meet dozens of survivors of breast and
prostate cancer. So, that transformation
has been very central uh to all of this.
uh but not not true for all cancers. Uh
for some cancers and I say this in the
book like pancreatic cancer in fact if
you had metastatic pancreatic cancer in
1850 you would be the sort of in the
same place in 1950 and sort of be in the
same place in 2011. Some medicines have
changed but but really in many
fundamental senses it's remain the same.
So my point is when I say hope is
negotiable, hope is malleable. what
we're trying to do, I think, now in in
in oncology is trying to convert as many
cancers as we can into these chronic
forms. Uh because then people can live
with it instead of dying of it. And
that's an enormous transformation. Um
it's a little bit like diabetes. You
know, we still can't cure diabetes. We
often can't cure heart disease, but
there survivors who live with diabetes.
I mean, you know, the imagine the moment
of time when insulin was discovered. I
mean you know insulin converted a
disease that was very very lethal. In
fact you die of diabetes in the 1920s uh
into a disease that was uh manageable
chronic. So that's the kind of
transformation that's happened for some
cancers. I think you've said that this
book the ultimate aim is to find out is
cancers inconceivable. You also said is
it possible to eradicate the disease
from our bodies and societies forever?
Where is cancer research when it comes
to these questions today? Well, the
first question is I mean can cancer be
completely eliminated from human
societies? And the answer is very
unlikely. Um unlike for instance polio
uh unlike for instance smallox and the
reason has has very deeply to do with
the first point that I just made which
has a reason to do has to do with the
the reason that cancer develops in the
first place and that is that cancer is a
distortion of normaly and you can't do
away with normaly. So in other words,
the again the very genes that allow
cells to grow, if you distort those
genes, you get cancer. But you can't get
rid of growth. You can't say that I'm
going to stop growing because growth is
what repairs our tissue. Growth is what
repairs our our wounds. Cancer is a it
is an intersection between what we what
we inherit as genes and the environment.
So we can reduce the environmental
impact uh on our bodies, carcinogens as
it were, and reduce the rates of cancer.
We could delay the appearance of many
forms of cancer using prevention or
treatment techniques. Memography not a
very good one but at least you know one
of them. Um but uh but the idea that you
can completely eliminate it I think is
very very unlikely. You've referred to
the fact that you are dealing with all
these decisions you have to make where
your patients are concerned and you're
consumed by those decisions and on the
other hand at some point you do get I
think to quote you vaccinated against
the brunt of these feelings isn't it?
Um, is that a cycle all physicians, all
healers go through? And how essential is
that for your own to safeguard your own
commitment to the work? Well, I mean,
the first thing I think most people do
when you're in medicine, particularly in
cancer medicine, is you draw up a wall
between yourself and patients cuz it's
the safest thing to do cuz the, you
know, you don't want to penetrate that
wall. You don't want them to penetrate
that wall. you don't to become their
friends because you want to have you
want to keep yourself away so that you
don't get swallowed in by the world um
that that they're in. But that's a very
wrong approach, a very wrong-headed
approach. Uh because if you do that, you
you feel you don't you don't really
intersect with the lives of patients in
really the most complex ways. So again,
part of the reason that I wrote the book
was to break through that wall. I mean,
I I I underwent it and I talk about it
very frankly in the book. My my first
reaction when I was sort of immersed in
the cancer ward was I was immediately my
first reaction was um you know I should
put up this wall. I should try to
compartmentalize. It's
self-preservation. Yeah. It's a kind of
self-preservation. It's very defensive.
It is very it's a kind of defense. Um
but it's not medicine. It's it's
precisely the opposite of medicine. It
it lacks the the the cardinal qualities
of medicine. you know, compassion, the
the use of your reason to help other
people heal, to get better, to get
cured, to get treated. Um, so again, for
me, the book became a mechanism by which
I could pierce through this own the wall
that I had made around myself and all
physicians do this. I mean, I think
you'd be uh you'd have to think of
yourself as a particularly benign saint
uh to say that you don't. One of the
things that happens to me uh in this
book is is the the slow wearing down of
that vaccination of that barrier such
that in fact the the the the process be
begins to become more complete in the US
where you have um insurance companies
you have litigation when it comes to
medicine and the treatment of disease
and treatment of patients uh in India
you don't have that but you have while
on the one hand you have great degrees
of faith and belief in medicine and
doctors On the other hand with some
people and a lot of increasingly a lot
of people a huge amount of cynicism at
the commercialization are doctors guilty
or are these the exceptions? Well, I
mean, you know, I I don't think that
there are black and white categories. I
think many physicians practice
unbelievably
uh
unbelievably wonderful rigorous medicine
and some people don't. Uh many
physicians uh find themselves tempted by
the by the commercial aspects of of the
profession of medicine. I mean, it has
to be admitted that medicine is a
profession unlike any other. I I think
that medicine is probably the most
complex profession we have as human
beings. There's no other profession that
I can think of that involves all these
aspects of of the human brain. The
rational, the compassionate, the uh you
know using statistics on one hand and
literature on the other. I mean you know
and intuition in between and intuition
in between. I mean you know what other
profession does this? Um and what other
profession has this kind of relationship
you know intensified relationship with
another human being? They're very very
few. Um so I think medicine is is one of
the most complex professions and
therefore being at this level of
complexity is open to abuse. Um I
actually you know talk about this book
and sometimes sometimes the the abuse
might be unconscious. It might be a lack
of humility uh in medicine which has
nothing to do with malevolent intent. It
might be that you know you actually
you're trying to do the best and in
doing so you imagine yourself as a hero
and in in doing so you actually do a
disservice. I talk about for instance
the radical mastctomy.
you know, a very aggressive surgery on
the on on breast cancer, uh, which was
really a a great example of of the road
to hell being laid by the best of
intentions. Uh, you know, these surgeons
really wanted to help women. Um, but
they they and the women themselves
wanted to uh, you know, many women would
say, "Please operate on me in this way."
But in fact, it didn't work at all. You
know there are ethical dilemmas almost
on a daily basis if not you know uh and
yet it can get reduced to or be seen as
very commercial decisions that are being
made by doctors isn't it especially with
insurance companies coming into play and
all of that I'm a very big believer in
in the in suspicion keep keeping a
profession uh ethically uh on the right
standard but on a personal level on a on
a human level on one human being to
another human being level that same uh
suspicion can be very destructive
because ultimately I think when you
especially in in in things like in in
cancer there's a large act of faith that
goes on between patients and their
physicians and it has to be that way you
know you cannot go through treatment uh
for cancer you cannot enter uh without a
great deal of faith but on the flip side
on on a professional level I think the
suspicion is very well warranted because
it keeps it keeps the profession on its
toes um we we know that there's There's
a very charged history um the Tuskegee
trials, you know, we know that there's
been collusion more than once between
the pharmaceutical companies and and
medicine. We know that there's been
collusion between insurance companies of
medicine. And on the flip side, we we
know that there's been a kind of a field
of uh just uh nonsensical lawsuits uh
that have cropped up changing the
profession of medicine such that people
are practicing only defensive medicine
uh in certain you know in certain parts
of the United States. So so we know all
of this can happen. What's important
though is that you cannot let that
suspicion sully the very personal
relationship that you have which is an
act of faith between yourself and a and
a patient or between a patient and a
physician. And that's a very important
question. How do you take how do you
maintain the the appropriate suspicion
of a profession which is constantly
trying to make heroes of itself? I'm
very suspicious of heroes. While not
exactly a hero, you are being celebrated
these days, isn't it? Because of the
book and the success of the book. Do we
see you speaking more at literature
festivals and intellectual conferences
about the future of the world and less
let's say presenting medical papers? Is
there a balance there? Is it it's very
it's been I've been struggling to keep
that balance that the lab my laboratory
is still very much alive. Um I told I I
I said to my my post-docctoral my
graduate students I said you know uh I
began to realize there's a problem in in
the world when when you and I have to
communicate by text uh by SMS and
texting because you can't run a
laboratory by SMS and texting. What's
interesting is you know even in
2011 if you run a laboratory you have to
be it's FaceTime that still counts. You
can't you cannot replace FaceTime by
anything not by Skype nothing. Actually
what I try what I try to do is I try to
cluster uh the time so that they're
separated. I don't you know I don't
spend the entire year diffusely running
about from one airport to another
airport. But on the flip side I also
think that um cancer is a disease of
such prominence that we need
spokespeople. I mean this very year the
budget of the national cancer institute
of the United States is probably going
to be deeply threatened. Now that's a
big problem. um and sitting in the
laboratory which is where I started or
sitting in the clinic you can't solve
that problem that that won't solve the
problem you require I think scientists
have have often done a very poor job of
being advocates for themselves and you
require this kind of advocate this kind
of conversation about this we've seen
the wars that the US has embarked on you
know in the decade starting the 2000
we've then seen the e the recession and
the downturn in this context text how
much is American government uh spending
happening on medical research on cancer
research I'll give you a couple of I'll
give you a couple of thoughts so my
first thought is let's talk numbers um
the national cancer institute budget of
the United States there institutes all
around the world many many nations have
them India has a similar version of it
but the national cancer institute budget
of the United States is about $5 billion
a year uh the FDA budget is give or
take4 to5 billion a year that's the food
and drug administration So in other
words, to to create new medicines, to
make research, which is the one of the
tasks of the National Cancer Institute,
and to make these medicine appear safely
and appropriately within the public
realm, which is the task of the Food and
Drug Administration, the United States
spends about $10 million uh a year. In
2008, the United States spent more than
that money combined uh on in one month
of the war in Iraq. So in other words,
every month uh the United States was
spending more money than the amount of
money that's required to keep at bay a
disease that is still killing every year
600,000 men and women in the United
States. Um still killing 7 to 8 million
uh humans around the world. So you it
gives you a sense of perspective on the
numbers and you begin to see you know
what happens. But my fear is not just
the numbers. My fear is something
actually much more uh much more
intangible and that is you know the
Japanese talk about a lost decade. Um my
fear is that if we begin to look if we
if we don't invest in in research if we
don't invest in in this in clinical in
clinical sciences that we're going to
see a lost decade of molecules. We're
going to see a lost decade of medicines
a lost decade of opportunities and
surgery lost decade of prevention
mechanisms. And it's our decade. If we
don't if we lose this decade then we
will never get it back again because as
you know we are the next generation of
men and women that are facing will face
cancer in our lifetimes. So it's our
decade to lose and it's our children's
decade to lose even more. So it seems to
me a deeply critical issue. I understand
that you know economic recessions allow
you know are very clarifying. They allow
us to clarify our priorities. But my
point is that this is a priority that
needs to be clarified in the positive
direction. We can't lose this decade. If
we lose innovation around this decade,
it's not going to come back. A lot of
commentators uh on the US, you know,
other other Indian-Americans like um
Fared Zakaria, they're all commenting on
the fact that the US is investing less
and less um in research and development
in fundamental research in uh you know
even in education less and less
Americans are becoming engineers or
going into uh physical sciences. Is that
something you see as a professor as a
teacher also you know associated with
Colombia? Absolutely. I'm seeing that.
Yeah. you know and the and the pre the
pressures are there strong pressures in
in they are in fact you know students
are complaining that they don't have
they don't have the kind of mentorship
they don't have they're worried about
their future because there's no because
the funding is collapsing and these are
very important moments because as I said
if we lose the decade if we have another
a lost decade of molecules lost decade
of medicines then we're I think we're
going to be in deep trouble uh for the
future and you're beginning to see that
now in general I would say that the
solution to this is innovation. If you
innovate your way out of it, you'll be
we have you'll be okay. And the United
States even today remains uh a nation
that allow that knows how to allow
innovation uh in the broadest sense. But
it's something very critically coming up
in in the future. As someone who
migrated, you know, in you know, you
were the first person who went there in
your family, isn't it? So you're so
you're not the first generation. Your
kids will be f the first generation. I'm
the zero generation. You're the zero
generation. You're the starting point.
America still in spite of the problems
we've just discussed in, you know, in
spite of the policies we've just
discussed, it still is the land where
you can make these things happen,
especially in comparison to India and
where it is today in your field. Well,
in medicine is one one of the things
that's very interesting in medicine is
that uh unlike many other professions uh
and I'm talking about medical research,
you need longitudinal funding from
federal sources. Um it's very important
and the reason is because the process is
extremely slow and the the by definition
the process must be extremely riskaverse
by the time a medicine gets into a human
being. Right? Because the the you first
you want to do no harm, right? Now if
that's the case then there's a
natural innovations can only happen with
safety kept first. The United States has
had this capacity to fund basic research
at a very longitudinal level and that's
been the real critical thing in medicine
and if we want to emulate that model
it's absolutely important to have
innovation but it's also important to
have that very long slow burn of funding
right at the bottom of the pyramid. You
don't see that in India. Well, I see
that happening. Of course, there's deep
investments in research in India. Uh the
scale is different. Nationhood cannot be
about Bollywood and cricket, right? It
has to be about federal institutions
that uh govern our safety that create
longitudinal uh funding to innovate,
etc., etc. So, so and we have to find a
way to do this. And entrepreneurs by
themselves which there's so much
entrepreneurial energy in India they can
help in medicine but they cannot take
you all the way because you need that
low slow burn of the long-term
commitment and that's very something
government needs to do and I think only
federal institutions can do it only only
state can only the state can do that do
you see yourself uh writing more because
this book was great for us I'm in the
middle of the the second book uh but you
know my books are um uh someone said The
first time they thought the first time I
sent them the book, someone said they
they had gotten a phone directory in the
mail and they said, "Well, you know, I
thought they'd eliminated the hard copy
phone directory." So, my projects are
usually large uh by their very nature.
Um, so it'll it'll take a little bit of
time, but you'll continue writing. Yes,
absolutely. You spoke about the need for
advocacy uh and clearly this is also
something that interests you and you
know there is a felicity towards it. Uh
the being able to write, being able to
communicate, there are so many people
who would want to be able to work with
you. uh in a field that's not really the
primary work that you do, isn't it? So,
is that something that uh you need to
start thinking about how you engage with
it? It's it's a complicated story. I
think books, good books for me typically
come out of a lot of solitude. Um so, I
think advocacy can become a poison to
the writing of a book. Um and so you
have to be very careful about becoming
an advocate because advocates don't
generally tend to write good books. Uh
but for me particularly good books come
from a lot of solitude um lot of um
self-examination
um and thinking uh and that can be that
that kind of craft actually comes from
reading uh it doesn't usually come from
speaking you know while you're a
scientist a researcher a doctor a lot of
what you've read as you were perhaps
growing up and even today is not just
from from this part of life from these
disciplines but literature uh absolutely
I mean, you know, in fact, my favorite
genre of literature happens to be
poetry. But, uh, genre is is the wrong
word. My favorite aspect of literature
happens to be poetry. And you could make
the argument that is, you know, is the
least related. Um, and yet it really
informs the way I think, the way I
write, I hope. And therefore, I think
explains the choice of this 19th century
title, the the emperor of all maladies.
I think it has a poetic ring to it.
Thank you, Satan. Lovely talking to you.
Pleasure. Thank you.
[Music]